29
what they were to do". Reading about
that the priests set and ordered
for three days a fast for the virgin
Mary with great devotion.
The bishops and Jewish priests ordered
for three days, with great devotion
calling and begging God almighty,
that he would be so kind as to appear to them and
tell them through an angel what they were to do with this virgin.
About that voice which they heard in the church
indicating who was worthy of marriage
with the virgin Mary.
Then on the third day a loud voice arose
in the church, so that all heard him
saying so that all the young men of the lineage
of David or Judah, his grandfather, young and old,
who were not married, should come to the church, and that
each one should carry in his hand either a staff,
and give it to his high bishop,
so that he would place it
at the altar, and on whose
stem the branch and the flower should appear, then when
and that the Holy Spirit should sit on it in his dovelike form,
he is worthy that the Virgin Mary should be given to him in marriage. Therefore,
all the bishops and Jewish priests
30
ordered all the inhabitants of the Jewish land,
who were descended from the line of Judah,
from which David came, and who were not yet married, to come
to Jerusalem, each carrying a staff in his hand.
For this reason, many men, young and old, came,
each carrying a staff in his hand, according to the order,
and they gave them to the bishop,
and he took and marked each one
and placed them along the altar. With great devotion they waited for a miracle
of God, but until the third day they were there,
they saw no wonder. Then they went to prayer, asking God almighty with fervent prayers
to show them his miracle, according to his promise. Then they
heard in the church God's voice saying
that he did not come here nor bring his staff
the shepherd of Bethlehem, the son of Jacob from the line of Judah, Joseph.
Veneration of Joseph's glory, the spouse
of Mary and his purity
Joseph was from Bethlehem,
the son of Jacob, a man of upright morals and holy life,
and in wisdom he surpassed others.
By his grace he surpassed all,
and was the brother of Cleopas,
31
who after the death of Joachim took Anna, the sister of Ismeria,
as his wife. He was a faithful imitator
of truth and a lover of physical purity,
he protected the innocence of his heart, he was pleasing to God
and to people, because he was truthful,
faithful and safe, simple, good
gentle, quiet, humble, and very
prudent. He spoke friendly to everyone,
showed grace to everyone, he was a very wise carpenter, which gave him a large income,
which he used to help the poor, the sick,
pilgrims, and everyone he asked through God,
because he was full of ardent mercy.
He often served God almighty
with his ardent prayers, fasting, vigils,
tormented his body, observed the precepts
of the Mosaic law, loved God almighty with all his thought, heart
and soul, and always showed mercy to his neighbors.
He was also very pure in body, because he rejected every
bodily pleasure from himself
and loved purity; he was
pure from birth, was purely inspired
by the Holy Spirit, was pure in body,
pure in soul, and pure in virtuous
32 
and dignified customs. He did not condemn or condemn any
person, he loved the poor and the rich equally.
He was also neither excessively greedy nor miserly,
but was generous, merciful, cheerful
and pleasing to God. Reading about how
Joseph came to the temple, and how
his staff sprouted and blossomed,
and the Holy Spirit sat on it.
Hearing this voice and knowing that Joseph, the servant of God,
was worthy of this virgin, the priests immediately sent
to Bethlehem, that he also might come to the temple with his staff. Joseph, being
a righteous man, immediately obeyed
and came to Jerusalem, entering the temple,
carrying his staff in his hand and gave it
to the high bishop. As soon as he took it in his hand,
it immediately sprouted and blossomed.
Still being in the bishop's hand, the Holy Spirit sat on the staff
after descending in his dove-like form,
which was seen and testified by
a large group of people, and greatly surprised,
they all fell on their knees, praising God almighty,
saying that he was righteous and worthy,
33
for he was chosen by God with a strange character,
for he is a faithful and true servant God,
therefore he is worthy that this blessed virgin Mary should be given to him,
who was raised above all others as an angelic king
and deserved from God to be given to this holy man in this august marriage,
because God honored her with his glory, virtue, and dignity.
Reading how the Jewish priests ordered Joseph
to take Mary as his wife or bride
The Jewish priests and bishops
ordered Joseph to take Mary
as his bride and said to him: "Joseph,
most holy man, beloved of God, who is worthy
of the marriage of the chosen virgin, because
God raised you up by a great miracle
and chose you as the husband of the virgin Mary,
therefore we give you this august virgin and order you
to take her as your wife." He answered them Joseph:
"I thought I would never take a bride or a wife,
because I had given up on love,
even if I wanted to take a wife,
34
it is not right that I should have
to marry such a holy virgin.
I am a wretch worse than all men,
I am not worthy to touch such holy virginity,
for I am already old and it would not be right
to marry such a young and noble girl".
About Joseph's prayer when he was encouraged
to marry the virgin Mary
When the bishops and all the people
began to encourage him to take her as his wife,
Joseph went to prayer and began with warm
tears to implore God almighty, saying:
"O Lord almighty,
Creator of heaven and earth, guardian of the human race!
You created the first man from barren earth
and seated him in paradise with your sweets,
from his rib or some other bone you created a woman,
you gave her to him and commanded them to multiply,
but to depart from passions, to have children
without sin; but our first family
rejected this dignity with their crime, and they led us, their children
35
into sin. Therefore I wanted to escape from this sin,
I thought never to defile my body again, I vowed
to keep my soul pure for You, my Creator, because
You are a lover of purity. Therefore, dear Lord,
I ask You to be so kind as to save me, so that I may not be forced
to touch this holy virgin, who is the mirror
of purity and the dwelling place of the faithful divinity.
Reading how the angel asked Joseph
to take Mary as his bride and to take care of her. 
Then an angel appeared to him and began to comfort him, saying:
"O Joseph, servant of God! Do not worry about your oath,
but rejoice and take Mary as your bride,
for she is, in accordance with your oath, a faithful lover of virginity
and a candle of holy purity, and in accordance with your will, she wants
to remain a pure virgin. Through this virgin the angelic correction is to come, 
and also through this virgin the Jewish kingdom is to be healed,
through her the Jewish people will be exalted,
through her the whole world will be saved, through her the kingdom of heaven
36
will be exalted, through her the power of hell will be shattered.
Therefore, espouse her as your bride. You will always raise her in dignity,
fulfilling her needs and serving her as your queen." On the prayer of the blessed virgin Mary,
when she was bidden to take Joseph as her husband
When the Jews began to urge the blessed virgin
to take the servant of God Joseph as her husband,
she fled to God almighty with hot tears
and began to pray with heavy sighs of the heart, saying:
"O heavenly king, O faithful observer of every pure heart,
neither of my body nor of my spirit,
I have always kept my spirit pure, and have neither desired nor loved any before you, 
and to you I have offered my flower of purity,
and to you alone have I hidden my virginity. But today, my most beloved
Lord, they are urging me to abandon this vow and promise,
they are distancing me from your delightful love,
and are forcing me and another bridegroom to unite.
My only hope of salvation, my father and creator,
37
I beseech you not to allow my body and virginity to be disturbed,
for You are my companion and the chosen one of my heart.
I loved you, I rejoiced in you, I always desired you,
I did not seek a lover over you. You are my lover,
You are my husband, You are the most holy,
You are chosen above all,
You are more reverend, more beautiful than everything else.
You keep my secrets, You are my savior,
You are my beloved and lover,
You are my friend and companion.
Therefore, my dearest, today I ask you,
graciously deliver me from this great sadness".
Reading about how the angel appeared
to the blessed and reverend virgin Mary,
helps her and gladdens her in her sorrow
that she is forced to take Joseph as her husband
When Mary had prayed for so long,
invoking God almighty with sorrowful tears,
an angel came to her from heaven, rejoicing her:
"Mary, holy virgin, do not torment yourself
with such great sorrow, for God has heard your prayers
38
and has sent me to you from heaven to comfort you,
for he wants you in your virginal state.
In this way you will be given according to the custom of marriage
to this holy man Joseph, he will protect you in your august virginity,
so you will remain a pure virgin forever,
in this way you will establish the Mosaic Law,
for you must be given to the holy man Joseph
and you will be joined to him in the bond of marriage.
He is a man of great mercy, a faithful lover
of noble chastity and your vow, because from his virginity
he lived faithfully in the chastisement of God and the virtue of his life, he is also
very quiet, calm and dignified, and is a great enemy
of his carnal pleasure, true in word, and very honorable.
Therefore he is worthy of your marriage, and will never trouble you
with his anger, sadness, or scandal, but will always keep you
as a pure girl, and will be the secret of your chastity.
He will fulfill your life's needs and perform your pure service.
He will be your bridegroom, companion and brother,
39
and you will be his bride, companion and sister".
Having said this,
the angel disappeared,
and Mary prayed to God almighty for this consolation
with great thanksgiving.
Reading how the virgin Mary marries Joseph,
and how the priests gave him three months to take Mary as his wife
Then the Jewish priests immediately called
the blessed virgin Mary
and gave her as a vow to the worthy man Joseph,
and gave him three months not to take her as his wife for twelve Sundays.
So Joseph immediately returned to Bethlehem,
greatly rejoicing and thanking God almighty
for such a gift, and began preparations for his wedding. Reading of how the Jewish priests
sent Mary to Nazareth,
to her father's house, and gave her seven virgins
as a witness to her purity
When the bishops sent the virgin Mary to Nazareth,
to her father, they gave her seven virgins as companions,
who stayed with her in the house of God,
to cheer her up and bear witness to her purity